CANCER STATISTICS- 2007 - 2015 Mortality (Lung Cancer)

We wanted to investigate how lung cancer occured in the population. We looked at gender, race, age, location, and poverty level- assessment of risk?

-Does gender,race/ethnicity, age, poverty, and geographic disparties exist within lung cancer mortality (nationwide/specific states & which year or all years)



Then we narrowed down to race and poverty.
-Mechanisms underlying racial differences in lung cancer deaths may be confounded by socioecnomic factors such as poverty rate. 

What is more determinative on lung cancer mortality, race or poverty?
Null Hypothesis(H0):There is no relationship between race and lung cancer mortality within 2015
Alternative Hypothesis(H1):There is a relationship between race and lung cancer mortality within 2015

We decided to conduct a Chi-Square test on race and lung cancer mortality for 2015 using a p-value of 0.001. After conducting the test, we decided to reject the null hypothesis since the chi-square (10042.59) value exceeds the critical value (16.27) and accept the alternative hypothesis which states that there is a realtionship between race and lung cancer mortality within 2015. 

Null Hypothes

1. Line graph - over 10 years cancer deaths by race
- Brown- update with more years from new csv files and adjust values to be crude rate, not total
2. Poverty and Cancer state Bar charts - poverty by state side by side with cancer crude rate deaths - Mike
- Gretel- update Abear's code and give to Mike
- Mike will combine the two bar charts into 1
3. Scatter plot of cancer rate w/ poverty rate - match by county
- line of best fit
4. Pie chart - 
- Gretel - chi sq hypothesis test
5. Gender bar chart 
- Brown - update gender bar chart to include 10 years of data

Analysis on one of the six leading causes of death- Lung Cancer (according to WHO-World Health Organization) on a national level within in each state from 2001-2015. This analysis will target analyze risk factors/socioeconomic demographics in relation to lung cancer mortality to determine viable relationships and/or correlations between the varaibles. 


 

Variables- Year 2015
Independent Variables: 
	1. States (All U.S. States- National Level)
	2. Year(8 Year time frame) 2007-2015

	Socioeconomic characteristics of the population (per state):
	3. Race
	4. Gender
	5. Age Groups: 
	6. Poverty Rate % yrs (2012-2017)

Dependent Variables:
	1.Cancer Sites- Lung and Bronchus
	2. Death and population from the Census-

	
Core Hypothesis: ?

Research Questions:
 
	1. Compare Lung Cancer deaths within each state over (2007-2015) time interval. 
	a. Which state had a significant trendline over the 8 year timeframe? 
	b. Compare total lung cancer deaths of all states per year. 
	c. Analyze trendlines for high/low peaks per state- note which year has a significant low or high peak for each state? 
	***(Analyze a peak or something interesting within the trendlines to decide on specific year for analysis on the following questions) :
	
	2. Which state has the greatest/lowest number of lung cancer deaths? Analyze by the following:
		•  Race- Which race had the highest/lowest number of lung cancer deaths per state?
		• Gender- Which gender is associated with highest/lowest number of lung cancer deaths within each state?
		• Age- Determine which age groups had the highest/lowest number of lung cancer deaths within each state?

	3. Lunger Cancer and poverty rate % assoication per state. Is there a relationship between poverty and lung cancer?  

	
Charts:
1.a.Line graph- trend line of lung cancer mortality on a national level/nationwide over time from 2007-2015. 
X- axis: Years/ Y-axis: Total of Lung Cancer deaths
-By Race (different lines/colors per race)
1.b.Line graph- trendline of lung cancer mortality on a national level/nationwide over time from 2007-2015
X- axis: Years/ Y-axis: Total of Lung Cancer deaths
-By Gender (different lines/colors per gender)
1.c.Line graph- trend line of lung cancer mortality on a national level/nationwide over time from 2007-2015 
X- axis: Years/ Y-axis: Total of Lung Cancer deaths
-By Age (different lines/colors per age group)

2*** Pick a significant year from line graph from above ^^
3*** Then compare States to see which states had the highest/lowest mortality of deaths(bar chart- align states on side, figure out formatting later)
4*** Pick the state with the highest total mortality lung deaths and a state with the lowest mortality lung deaths and then compare the following for each state:
   5- Race (pie chart)  ------------------------------> for low/high state 
   6- Gender(pie chart) ------------------------------> for low/high state
   7-Age (line graph)  ------------------------------> for low/high state

8. Heatmaps of Poverty rate and Lung Cancer Mortality per state/national level- Total gun deaths, homicides, suicides, poverty rate per county.